# Arms and Influence

## Thomas C. Schelling

### Ch 1: The Diplomacy of Violence

Force can not only be used to achieve a (military or diplomatic) objective; it can also be used
purely to hurt. The threat of punitive-only force leads to an ability to coerce the adversary into
taking action that you want him to take without having to exercise the force at all. The "difference
between taking what you want and making someone give it to you" (p2).

Application of force in furtherance of objectives is primarily focused on meeting resistance
(military) on the battlefield where the opposing strengths battle it out for the spoils. Brute force
is successful only when it is used; the power to coerce is only effective when it is _unused_ (when
it remains "latent violence"). Latent violence also requires the adversary to understand
capabilities and possible impact of the application of force, and to be sufficiently scared of its
use that he concedes without violence. It's a cost-benefit analysis.

Limited violence as a demonstration of the capability to inflict greater pain is still coercive (see
discussion on p8). Genghis Khan changed his strategy from brute force (killing the vanquished enemy)
to coercive force (marching them ahead of his troops so that they would be the first to die).
Placing POW camps near strategic sites is also an example of coercive force.

Modern war is more likely to use the power of pain (vs the power to seize or hold). The aggressor's
objectives are more easily met when his reserve strength is used for its potential as opposed to in
its application.

Coercive power may be more frequently seen at the end of a war, during the surrender negotiations.
It is only recently that it has been possible to deploy coercive power in the absence of a military
victory.

"Military action was seen as an _alternative_ to bargaining, not a _process_ of bargaining" (p16),
unlike the use of coercive threats to achieve objectives.

We have always had the power to annihilate an enemy. The difference in the atomic/nuclear age is the
speed with which we can do it. We have not thought about how such a rapid war might end without
total destruction; in the past it would be sufficient to stop fighting. Now the fighting is over in
minutes/hours.

Nuclear war is unique in that if brought to its kinetic conclusion, there is no military objective
("seize/hold" left). Therefore the use of nukes is a purely "pain-based" application of force.o

Modern warfare has seen a shift towards involving noncombatants as targets. "Dirty war" (p 27).
Hurting noncombatants is now part of the coercive nature of diplomacy. Another difference is that
noncombatants in previous centuries (for example, in the middle ages) had no skin in the game; one
ruler was just as good (or bad) as another and the battles were between kings and royalty. Now,
however, noncombatants are involved in warfare insofar as their life is upended by war, and they
directly or indirectly support the war machine (through labor, propaganda, etc.). War as a national
effort (p28).

"If modern war were a clean one, the violence would not be ruled out but merely saved for the
postwar period. Once the army has been defeated in the clean war, the victorious enemy can be as
brutally coercive as he wishes." (p30).

Today, nations want the "influence that resides in latent force" (p31) as opposed to "brute force
military victory". They prefer "the bargaining power that comes from \[the\] capacity to hurt, not
just the direct consequence of successful military actions." (p31).o

Coercive diplomacy existed throughout history but still required a military victory (real or
predicted). Because today "the power to hurt ... is commensurate with the power to take and to
hold... it is even more necessary to think of warfare as a process of violent bargaining."

"Military strategy can no longer be thought of... as the science of military victory. It is now
equally, if not more, the art of coercion, of intimidation and deterrance.... \[It\] has become the
diplomacy of violence." (p34).

### Ch 2: The Art of Commitment

#### Credibility and Rationality

To what extent will a country go to defend another? It seems logical that a country will "fight to
the death" to preserve its own territory, but what about mutual defense or treaty obligations?
(Would the US engage in a war with the Soviets over Paris?) Regardless of the actual decision, the
threat is predicated on the ability to convince the adversary that you will take a course of action.
This is easily done when you allow a bit of "randomness" into your policy - either by delegating the
authority downward or to someone outside the diplomatic/political arena, or by being a bit
inconsistent in your statements and impulsive in your actions (think Khrushchev and the
shoe-pounding).

Kennedy's policy announcement that a missile fired anywhere in the Western hemisphere would be
tantamount to an attack on the US inviting a full-scale response is another example - previously the
policy was more along the lines of "proportional response" but this injected uncertainty into the
mix.

The difficulty with this type of deterrence is making the adversary believe you mean it. Would we
really risk the destruction of some major US cities if the Soviets decided to attack Paris?

#### Coupling Capabilities to Objectives: Relinquishing the Initiative

Sometimes removing options is the best approach for deterrence: "burning bridges" so that the
adversary knows you have no choice but to do X in response to Y. "Relinquishing the initiative"
forces the enemy to take the next step in the escalation - and if that step is aggressive, then he
is seen as the aggressor ("last clear chance" to avoid conflict). Example: stationing 7500 US troops
in West Berlin: USSR would have to kill the troops (and thus initiate aggression against the US
directly) in order to take Berlin. The soldiers served as a sacrificial army. "\[D\]eterrence often
depends on relinquishing the initiatiove to the other side." (p45). The freedom to select the actual
action taken in response to an aggression may still be retained. In the nuclear age, the aggressor
is the one whose action risks touching off a nuclear war as a response to the aggression.

Counter to "last clear chance" is to give the person being attacked the opportunity to escape. The
idea (from the attacked perspective) is to eliminate any possibility of escape, to "burn all the
bridges" so that there can be no question of commitment.

The commitment must be well-defined - if the enemy senses that we have a loophole from which we can
escape being the "victim", then he might decide that we have deliberately retained that loophole so
we can avoid retaliating and therefore might attack.

The response must also be rational and expected: even if we are committed to doing _something_,
there should be a sense of what it is we are committed to do: recover lost territory? Avenge deaths?
Start a nuclear war? It could get quickly out of hand.

#### Coupling Capabilities to Objectives: The Process of "Commitment"

In addition to cutting off your option to retreat, you can publicly commit to a response (staking
your honor and reputation). Public treaties a good example. Some countries enshrine their treaty
commitments in law but too many can cheapen the effectiveness of this approach. The beneficiaries of
these commitments may not even want them (India, for example, knows that the US will respond in the
event China invades regardless of any treaty obligation - because we cannot afford to let the world
see China expanding - so there is nothing to be gained by signing something with us.)

#### The Interdependence of Commitments

Maintaining our reputation to adversaries is important. If they think we are cowardly it is worse
than if our allies thought the same. If an adversary believes he will suffer no consequences for an
action, he is more likely to take that action. If we do not back up our commitments in one sphere,
the adversary will believe that we do not have the fortitude to do so elsewhere.

We require our adversaries to lose respect for our commitments elsewhere if we fail to support a
specific obligation - this way they know that we would support that specific obligation precisely
because we cannot afford to have them lose respect for our other commitments.

We identify more strongly with protecting our borders. This is good and bad. It can be a detriment
if our weapons/strength is concentrated outside our borders, because the adversary might then see an
attack on that strength as something less serious than an attack against resources inside our
border. An attack against an aircraft carrier in the China Sea, for example, would be treated
differently than attack against the same carrier in port in Hawaii.

Similarly, if we concentrate our missiles next to our cities, we essentially hold the cities hostage
against an adversarial attack in the hopes that the enemy would not want to hit a city even though
he might want to destroy our missiles.

#### Discrediting an Adversary's Commitments

If a country applies to an adversary a structure or defaults to thinking about an adversary's sphere
of influence and commitment in a particular way, it is easy for the adversary to exercise that
influence and commitment. The US treated the Chinese and Soviets as a single bloc; this allowed the
USSR to extend its influence to China (prior to the Sino-Soviet split). On the other hand, since the
US never recognized Soviet influence over Cuba, it was difficult (due to geography and culture) for
the Soviets to claim that Cuba was part of their bloc.

Providing a way for an adversary to escape a commitment is sometimes beneficial. Soviets objected to
US involvement in Cuba as "piracy" between the US and Cuba, with the USSR as a champion of
self-determination and free seas; the US treated it as a dispute between the USSR and the US, with
Cuba caught in the middle. The piracy angle allowed the Soviets to back away from Cuba by protesting
the piracy against it and claiming that Cuba, not the USSR, was the victim / aggrieved party.

On the other hand, the US actions when the Berlin wall went up cost the US some prestige, as it was
assumed by others that we would protect East Berlin. When we failed to do so ("backing out of our
commitment"), it cost us some prestige at the benefit of not having an open war.

Sometimes it's beneficial for a country to force an adversary to keep a commitment (Chinese
harassment of Quemoy tying up and frustrating the US).

#### Circumventing an Adversary's Commitments

Salami tactics ("give a mouse a cookie"; incrementally escalating) may be effective in skirting an
adversary's commitment (to defense of another, for example). However, when dealing with this
yourself, it may be beneficial to be a bit unpredictable in your response (or have a prior
reputation for unpredictability) so that there is still a risk that a slight incursion might have
outsize response.

#### The Distinction Between Deterrence and "Compellence"

Deterrence: persuading someone NOT to do something Compellence: persuading someone to do something

Deterrence is inherently specific: "Don't do this or I will do this". Compellence requires
specificity: "Do this (in this way, in this order, to this extent) or I will do this". The
punishment threatened with compellence might actually get in the way of the goal: "Tell me where the
money is or I'll kill you".

With deterrence, the threat of punishment is likely tied to the behavior being discouraged. With
compellence, perhaps not.

Deterrence involves setting the conditions and waiting. Compellence requires initiating an action or
a commitment to action that ceases only if opponent responds.

Benefits of deterrence begin immediately. Benefits of compellence are realized at the end of the
action.

Compellence requires timing consideration. Can't have "must pay tribute for 6 months or we'll bomb
you in 6 weeks". Risk that opponent views the compellent demand as impossible to fulfill and
therefore has nothing to lose by disobeying.

Salami tactics can evade compellence.

#### Defense and Deterrence, Offense and Compellence

Defense and deterrence can be linked.

- Forcible ("pure") defense: object is to resist successfully so the adversary cannot succeed
- Deterrent ("coercive") defense: induce adversary not to proceed by making it painful. Successful
  defense is not required / might not be possible.
- Passive deterrence: tripwire that requires little action after set
- Active ("dynamic") deterrence - threat is communicated by stages - gradual increase in cost to
  adversary.

Defensive action might not succeed in restraining enemy but might make him think twice as the costs
become too high. This can discourage future attempts by him and others. Local resistance is
effective here.

"'Compellence' is more like 'offense'" (p79).

- Forcible offense is taking something by direct action that the enemy cannot block.
- Compellence is inducing his withdrawal / collaboration by an action that threatens to hurt. The
  action might not be sufficient to achieve the ultimate objective but it is costly enough to the
  enemy that he decides it's not worth fighting for.

When passive deterrence fails, options are limited. Cuban missile crisis: verbal threats (passive
deterrence) were not taken seriously by USSR; they lacked automaticity. It was difficult to begin
resistance after the Russians had started deploying missiles, not to mention gradual increases of
that resistance. Kennedy found himself "no longer in a deterrent position and hand to embark on the
more complicated business of compellence" (p81). The missiles were deployed and sitting there; the
next move was the US's. We needed to convince the Russians that a bad situation was forthcoming but
they had not shown any indication that verbal threats were effective.

A single overt act would pose the risk of an unrecoverable escalation; the goal was to put the
Russians in a position to be the ones who had the "last clear chance" to avoid catastrophe.
Solution: embargo/quarantine with sufficient time for USSR to evaluate the situation and get the
ships to turn around. This provided the US with a solution that "had many of the virtues of static
deterrence". Most favorable outcome when deterrence has failed is to find a compellent threat that
has aspects of deterrence.

One additional potential downside of compellence is that the enemy's action is generally
unmistakable as capitulation - it forces the loss of prestige/reputation in public. To counter this,
compellent objectives might be deliberately vague with specific actions that are required
communicated privately.

However, sometimes public loss of face is desired, especially to deter future action / others.

Compellent action can sometimes have the opposite effect from what was intended. (Vietnam bombing to
reduce support for the VC by the North.) What were the actions that would have been sufficient? It
is possible that the goals were not properly defined / communicated so that the North Vietnamese
could agree to them. In some cases vague goals are ok - leave it up to the enemy to determine how
best to comply - but in some cases this is not a good idea since there is no guarantee that the
compellent action by the aggressor will cease even if an action is taken in response.

Must recognize that individuals and governments operate differently in the face of compellent
actions. More straightforward to get a single individual to change his mind. Governments might have
to be restructured entirely. In some cases governments might be completely immune to coercion
(Hitler) and revolt by others might be the best/only way forward.

#### "Connectedness" in Compellent Threats

Generally, deterrent threats have some sort of connectedness with the activity that is being
challenged: troops stationed in Berlin are there to defend Berlin. Compellent actions are less
likely to require connectedness: blockade Vladivostok in order to secure concessions from the
Soviets re: Cuba. Regardless, there is an advantage to maintaining connectedness: it helps
communicate the threat itself and the desired actions. It also sets limits on the actions - avoids a
"spiral of reprisals and counteractions" (p88). It defines what is NOT demanded and strengthens the
idea that the threat will stop once compliance is achieved.

Even in deterrent threats, connectedness is frequently good: contingent actions (that is, actions
threatened to induce compliance as opposed to actually initiated) gain credibility when connected.

Components of an ideal compellent threat (p89):

- causes minimal harm if compliance is forthcoming and maximal harm otherwise
- is achievable within the given timeframe
- cannot be stopped once started except by compliance
- all these conditions fully understood by adversary

This means that the adversary is the only one who has the "last clear chance" to avoid - if the
initiator can pull a punch at the last minute the adversary might count on him to do that.

Important to ensure that the harm stops once compliance is achieved - adding conditions to the
bargain demonstrates unconnectedness and causes the imposer to lose credibility.

#### Compellence and Brinksmanship

Compellent actions can cause pain over time, or can create a (shared) risk (usually catastrophic).
The latter is defined as "brinksmanship" - when the aggressor creates a risk that has outsize
consequences (usually for both parties).

### The Manipulation of Risk

With perfect information and credibility, we would enter political stasis as nations would not doubt
threats made by others and would avoid making threats that conflicted to the point where war was
required. However, with imperfect information and uncertain credibility, we have the risk that
misunderstanding of the situation and the adversary's response would cause us to take action that
raises the risk of war.

Nations can use the uncertainty to an advantage by engaging in brinksmanship - raising the stakes in
order to effect a desired outcome, even when those stakes are mutually destructive. Unpredictability
yields options - when you are not constrained to being a totally rational actor, you have
flexibility (blackjack dealer vs blackjack player).

It is possible that the uncertainty / brinksmanship yields an outcome that neither side wants.

#### Brinksmanship: The Manipulation of Risk

Brinksmanship defined: "manipulating the shared risk of war" (p99). Requires uncertainty that some
confluence of events beyond the control of either party MIGHT cause this risk to be realized.
Without uncertainty, deterrence would be the status quo: tripwires set, with the conditions under
which they would activate fully known to both parties - as long as the conditions were tolerable,
neither party would instigate.

Taking a risk does not necessitate taking the last clear step into disaster - it imposes that risk
on the opponent as well who (presumably) doesn't want disaster. Escalation in limited conventional
war can impose such risks. "Being able to lose a local war in a dangerous and provocative manner may
make the risk... outweigh the apparent gains to the other side". If the Soviets overran the US
forces in Germany, that would result in a loss to the US but we would survive it and would
drastically increase the possibility of nuclear escalation. In this respect, having a small force
act as a deterrent is effective.

#### Limited War as a Generator of Risk

Limited war enhances the risk of general war. Therefore, the threat to engage in limited war is also
a threat to increase the risk to both parties that a general war is more likely. (Limited war is
"rocking the boat" (p105).)

Same goes for enlargements of existing war. Escalations in limited war increase the likelihood of a
general war, even (especially?) by the party who is at a disadvantage in the limited war. The risk
is not like a trip wire where the response is definitive; it's more like a minefield where there is
uncertainty surrounding whether or not general war is started. Escalation can therefore be used as a
tactic to "confront the enemy with a heightened risk" (p106).

In Western Europe, the Soviets must realize that their initiation of a limited war risks a general
war, not because it is a tripwire, but because of an inadvertent escalation ("The other side is
about to go full-bore, so I might as well do it first", or "I believe we're already in a general
war, so let's go!")

Use of nuclear weapons is one way to escalate a limited war. Both sides would be aware of this risk.
"It is our sheer inability to predict the consequences of our actions and to keep things under
control, anmd the enemy's similar inability, that can intimidate the enemy (and of course, us too)."
(p109).

Summary: the risk of initiating a general war (from a limited war, but more generally too) exists
precisely because the conditions for its initiation are outside one party's control.

#### Nuclear Weapons and the Enhancement of Risk

Nukes raise the risk of general war. This risk must influence our strategy. Use of nukes has the
capability of dramatically (relative to other actions) raising the risks of general war and thus the
tactical advantages of nukes are not as significant as the strategic advantages. "...we should not
introduce nuclear weapons against an adversary who as nuclear weapons on his side" (p110).

Introduction of nukes turns a war into a war of bargaining. For NATO planning:

1. nukes should not be evaluated for their tactical advantage.
2. success of NATO does not depend chiefly on whether it can win a local war.
3. inadequate forces can provide value by keeping situation in turmoil so that there is no "quick,
   clean" (p112) victory.
4. decentralization of nukes is neither necessary nor advantageous if tactical advantages are not
   important. Use of nukes is a command decision that will involve all levels of government, not
   just some field commander.
5. War plans should reflect the use of nukes to "create and signal a heightened risk of general war"
   (p112). Demonstration of nukes or a war of nerve may be required. The specific target to be
   destroyed is not important; the commitment to use nukes and the signal that it sends (that we are
   willing to dramatically increase the risk of general war) is what is important.
6. We have to expect the adversary to do his own similar planning and be prepared with our
   "counterproposal" (p113) options.
7. Use of nukes not only destroys targets but signals something, and "getting the signal right would
   be an important part of the policy." (p113-14). This might mean use of nukes earlier than
   tactically warranted (!!!) in order to send the signal that the engagement is now escalated to
   nuclear. "It is not necessarily prudent to wait until the last desperate moment in a losing
   engagement to introduce nuclear weapons as a last resort. By the time they are desperately needed
   to prevent a debacle, it may be too late to use them carefully, discriminatingly, with a view to
   the message that is communicated, and with the maintenance of adequate control" (p114).

Use of nukes will upend a tradition of non-use and this shock value can be exploited once. "This is
not an event to be squandered...." (p115). We should not be so hasty to "vulgarize" (p116) the
weapons by using them where they are not absolutely warranted.

#### Face, Nerve, and Expectations

Game of chicken.

In short: countries' "face" that needs saving is actually important, as it signals the limits of its
tolerance and also defines its consistency of future actions. Korean War left 30k US soldiers dead
but according to the author it was worth it because it showed the Soviets how far we're willing to
go to stop spread of Communism.

Side thought: going to war to save face is just a way to project an internal consistency that other
countries - especially adversaries - can rely on for future decisions, and might in many ways result
in a more stable geopolitical environment.

### The Idiom of Military Action

At the end of a war, both sides (victor and vanquished) have ability to impose further costs on each
other. In the case of WWII, the US needed the Japanese government's assistance to effect an orderly
withdrawal of Japanese troops from China and the South Pacific. Without this assistance, there would
have been further costs to the US in forcing them out of the last remaining strongholds/hideouts.
"Unconditional surrender" still assumes conditions: that in exchange for cooperation, the vanquished
party will avoid being exterminated post-surrender.

Korean War demonstrated that a limited war could be circumscribed by a set of accepted actions:
restraint - not in fighting, but in the ways to fight (no nukes; no bombing of China, no Russian
invasion). "... the fury of the battle was exceeded only by the preoccupation with violence held in
reserve" (p130).

#### Tacit Bargains and Conventional Limits

Bargaining is typically thought of as explicit and verbal, but it doesn't have to be. Choosing to
stop at a given point (geographical, escalatory, etc.) signals to the other party that there is a
demarcation line limiting your activity. The other party might then rely on an "unspoken agreement"
that as long as you do not do X, he will not do so either.

"Tacit" bargaining i("communication by deed rather than word", p137) is difficult but most effective
when it is all-or-nothing: "no gas weapons", "no nukes" as opposed to "just on military troops" or
"10 nukes, no cities". This is because in order for the proposed bargain to be understood in the
absence of formal discussions, both sides must have a shared understanding of what the rules are.
Geographical landmarks help; so does past performance/tradition. "Only bold outlines can be
perceived" (p141).

What about nukes? At base, nuclear yields can be compared to conventional yields, but there is
something different because they haven't been used (besides at the end of WWII) so there is a
novelty and a moral/symbolic difference in the use of nukes vs conventional.

"Tacit" bargaining also can involve levels of enlargement of conflict. There are "convenient
stopping places or dividing lines" (p135) at which both sides can pause and reevaluate. "...any kind
of restrained conflict needs a distinctive restraint that can be recognized by both sides,
conspicuous stopping places, conventions and precedents to indicate what is within bounds and what
is out of bounds." (p135). These levels appear not only in war, but in business, in gang activity,
... in short, in both tacit and explicit bargaining.

Tacit bargaining eschews fine print, negotiation and counternegotiaton, because there is no formal
way to signal understanding. The circumscriptions must "form a recognizable pattern" (p137) on their
own so that they are most likely to be mutually understood. It requires both parties to have a
common understanding without formalization. Other qualities (p138):

- "limits must be of a kind that each side can effectively administer on itself"
- violating limits should be "conspicuous and ... readily noticed"

Tradition and precedent have all these qualities. Even though the US didn't sign the Geneva Accords,
we still adhered to them in WWII because they were understood by the adversary: as long as they
didn't abuse our POWs, we wouldn't abuse theirs.

#### The Idiom of Reprisal

Reprisal works best to teach an adversary a lesson (and as a way to communicate limits of action in
a bargaining situation) when it is clearly connected with the initiating event in both time,
proportionality, and effect. Sometimes it's advantageous not to have a connection between event and
reprisal, but that just means you're decreasing your "reliability index" (that is, the ability of
the adversary to predict your reaction). As usual, words explaining the reaction to an event are
less effective than the communication of intent by the reaction itself.

#### Tactical Responses and Diplomatic Responses
