# Wizards of Armageddon

### Ch 1: Year Zero

Inter-war period - most universities were followers of Wilsonian political theory, which held that
war should be illegal. Discouraged discussion of war in classes. U Chicago bucked the trend.
Postwar, _Brodie_ went to Yale (Institute of Int'l Studies) after being let go from a fellowship at
Dartmouth (1943). _Brodie_ also did work for Navy - ghostwriter for _Adm. King_, psyops for ONI.
Yale Institute similar to _Quincy_'s school of thought at Chicago. Many scholars came from Chicago -
_William Fox_, who recruited _Brodie_. Hiroshima challenged _Brodie_'s treatises on naval strategy
and forced him to consider the implications of a war with atomic weapons.

- _Bernard Brodie_ - wrote naval strategy - U Chicago ug & grad, influenced by _Quincy Wright_ (_A
  Study of War_, which bucked the Wilsonian war-is-illegal trend of a US soured on war). _Brodie_
  and colleagues at U Chicago (along with _Jacob Viner_, who helped pioneer int'l political economy)
  took the stance that war is an extension of politics and economics and political science is
  interdisciplinary (anthropology, geography, econ, …) - that nations will do what is in their
  interest over adhering to some "greater good" rational actor role.

- _Nicholas Spykman_, _Arnold Wolfers_, and _Frederick "Ted" Dunn_ were colleagues of _Brodie_ at
  Yale's IIS.

### Ch 2: Living with the Bomb

Post-war debate over the implications of atomic weapons in politics and warfare. Debate as to
whether world government was feasible*necessary to control proliferation and use of atomic weapons
and what incentives nations would have of subordinating their autonomy to a larger body.

_Brodie_ theorized in _The Atomic Bomb and American Security_ that the Navy would not play a large
role in warfare, since naval effectiveness is maximized in long conflicts, and atomic war would be
brief. Came up with the following three ideas:

1. "Superiority \[of numbers\] is not itself a guarantee of strategic superiority in atomic bomb
   warfare" (p 30)- the economic theory of diminishing returns applies - if you have enough material
   to destroy the critical targets, any excess is less relevant.

2. "Deterrence of war is the only rational military policy" (p31) - futility of a surprise attack if
   the other side has the resources to counterattack - mutual assured destruction.

3. Recommendation of policy: to disperse arsenal away from primary targets in order to guarantee a
   counterstrike capability. Cities are now primary targets since the goal is to destroy adversary's
   capability to survive long term (economically, politically, psychologically, or via population).
   Objective: to "guarantee … the possibility of retaliation in kind." The conclusion is that the
   threat of retaliation can stand in for a world government as a "force from above looming over all
   international activity, working itself into every calculation of the risks and benefits of
   aggression" (p32).

### Ch 3: Planning for War

Emerging conflict with post-war USSR. US had demobilized rapidly, so atomic weapons were the only
significant tool ("an instrument of war – and hence of international politics", p 33) left.

_Brodie_ rethinking indiscriminate destruction of cities and whether superiority in number of
weapons really made little difference. Given shortage of U ore, the difference between 200 and 600
is greater than the difference between 2k and 6k and therefore prioritization of targets takes on
more importance. Cities by themselves may not be strategic enough (but later, the threat of city
destruction might be a useful tool. Japan surrendered not because we destroyed 2 cities, but because
we showed we had the potential and commitment to destroy others – they didn't know we only had 2
weapons.)

Gap in military thinking about effective use of atomic weapons as late as 1947. _Brodie_ writes
Strategy of Air Power in 1949 attempting to understand "how many bombs will do what?" where "'what'
must be reckoned in overall strategic results rather than merely acres destroyed".

Air power viewed as the new hotness. _Giulio Douhet_ (Italian Brig Gen) and _Billy Mitchell_ (US
General) big proponents of air power as the deciding factor.

Debate over strategic targeting of "nerve centers" (p36) of German economy vs indiscriminate bombing
of population centers to weaken morale and general war effort. Turns out that the latter didn't have
much of an effect on German production. In fact, because _Hitler_ didn't gear up for 100% war
economy, Germany proved more resilient to attacks on war infrastructure (why? Perhaps because
reallocation was still possible?)

Some evidence that strategic bombing (liquid fuel and chemicals, and transportation) did have an
effect, but results came too late to matter much. In any case, US had not given much though t to
target selection. Area bombing of cities was "a waste of bombs and lives that had no payoff
militarily" (p 37).

(Russians demoed atomic bomb in August 1949)

_Brodie_ memorialized these thoughts in Aug 15 1950 issue of The Reporter which made its way to AF
Chief of Staff General _Hoyt Vandenburg_. _Vandenburg_ hired _Brodie_ as a consultant to evaluate
targeting strategy. Korean War was viewed as a distraction ploy by USSR – ultimate goal to invade
Europe. War planning now essential: Offtackle name of plan that gave priority list to SAC.

Conflict between SAC led by _Curtis LeMay_ and Air Staff. _LeMay_ favored total war - drop
everything all at once on major cities - burn acreage. Air Staff favored strategic targeting (Delta
Bravo Romeo - disrupt USSR war making capacity, blunt USSR caps to deliver atomic strike, and retard
advances into Western Eurasia). _Brodie_ managed to piss both sides off. His criticism of both plans
(due to sloppy, illogical thinking) led to his summary dismissal from Air Staff after one of his
primary champions took a new assignment.

"\[There was\] more strategic leverage to be gained in holding cities hostage than in making
corpses" (p47) (_Brodie_, 1948 speech)

_Brodie_ had seen the benefits of access to classified, and didn't see a future in military planning
in academia, so he went to RAND.

### Ch 4: On the Beach at RAND

Founding of RAND.

Founded as an OR thinktank. Originally engineering, math, science. _John Von Neumann_, mathematician
and game theory pioneer, came on part time at request of _John Williams_, head of RAND math dept.
Later, social sciences and economics were included, to be led by _Hans Speier_ and _Charlie Hitch_.
With these new caps, RAND could start thinking about wargame theory and the "strategy of warfare"
(p73).

### Ch 5: The Superbomb

Development of the H bomb

Los Alamos working on H bomb over objections of _Robert Oppenheimer_ who favored smaller bombs for
their targeting precision. Unlinke A bombs with yields in ktons, H bombs promised mtons.

RAND team evaluating H bomb potential: _Ernst Plesset_ (physics), _Charlie Hitch_ (econ), _Jim Lipp_
(missiles), and _Bernard Brodie_ (social science). Team took their presentation on the road.
Strategic issues fell to Brodie who had joined RAND in the social sciences group. Using H bombs on
cities now considered immoral since the blast radius would still kill millions of people even if
measures were taken to minimize civilian casualties. However - USSR outnumbered US in western europe
so using H bomb in the rear of advancing Soviet troops would cause the same inability to prosecute
war by decimating the army (instead of the war production).

_Edward Teller_, Hungarian émigré, made the case for the H bomb against _Oppenheimer_. _Oppenheimer_
had his clearances revoked as a result of his opposition. _Teller_ founded LLNL in response to
concerns that Los Alamos was dragging its feet.

First H bomb test Sept 1952.

H bomb material not as scarce as A bomb, so more could be made, which meant that strategic/priority
targeting of cities due to lack of armament no longer an issue.

### Ch 6: The Vulnerability Study

SAC / AF is now the primary military delivery mechanism for nukes.

At Rand, focus is on using mathematics and game theory to optimize war planning. Turns out that
formulae with unknown variables can produce wildly inaccurate results. Pure science won't work
without historical background and/or domain knowledge.

_Albert Wohlstetter_ was studying consequences to US doctrine in the event of a USSR first strike.
Conclusion was that the SAC overseas air bases were woefully unprepared for a first strike. Nobody
had realized that the closer a base was to the enemy, the closer the enemy was to the base.
Early-warning radar would be insufficient to mitigate adversary first-strike in many cases. Pearl
Harbor v2.

Goal is to optimize ability for second strike given known constraints (technical: range of bombers,
number of weapons; financial: budget limitations) and tradeoffs (more money on refuelers = less for
bombers). _Wolhstetter_'s plan was to minimize materiel at overseas bases, use them for intermediate
refueling stops only, and disperse and harden equipment so that some would survive Soviet first
strike.

RAND briefed report 90+ times to AF personnel to mixed reception but got Acting AF COS Gen _Thomas
White_ (filling in for _Hoyt Vandenburg_) onboard. Committed to forming an ad hoc committee to
recommend COA.

_Curtis LeMay_, still head of SAC, disagreed with proposal in part because SAC was not subordinate
to Air Staff who commissioned study. Response was to use B-47 intermediate-range bombers out of
McDill, refuel over Iceland, strike Leningrad, and use the overseas bases as recovery points. "Throw
money at the problem."

Result: RAND's methodology for data-driven scientific evaluation of vulnerabilities set the high
water mark for rigor and was copied throughout gov't and industry.

### Ch 7: The Hydra-Headed Monster

Missiles - ICBMs.

Convair had the contract for Atlas ICBMs. Specifications were to haul a 3000 lb warhead 5000 miles
with a mach 6 reentry speed, and a CEP of 0.25 - 0.5 miles. Atlas was overspecced to such an extent
that technology didn't exist to satisfy the requirements, so it was slow-rolled.

RAND realized that the H bomb changed the dynamics: 1500 lb warhead could produce enough blast to
relax the CEP to 5 miles (megaton range), and since the USSR didn't have anything that could stop
mach 1 reentry, the missiles could be slower. Furthermore, the larger blast radius meant that fewer
missiles were necessary.

The flip side: SAC bases were now vulnerable since missile launches / inbounds were harder to
detect. Figuring out how to harden the bunkers protecting the SAC bombers became a challenge.
_Wohlstetter_'s report on vulnerability of SAC bases to bombers needed to be revised to account for
missiles. 200 psi shelters for bombers were feasible and were single-use.

### Ch 8: The Gaither Committee

Fear of Russian attack is driving strategy at this point given Wolhstetter report and the recently
realized threat of fallout from nukes which could represent 80% of the casualties. _Eisenhower_'s
chief science adviser, _James Killian_ (president of MIT), suggested _H. Rowan Gaither_ to lead the
NSC-convened Gaither (Rowan; president of Ford Foundation) committee to explore funding national
civil defense shelters. Civil defense was thought necessary in order to keep US morale high in the
event of a USSR first strike; without sufficient morale a retaliatory strike might not be feasible.

_Gaither_ chose _Robert Sprague_ as his deputy. Committee had a who's-who list of members, along
with several dozen research staff to prepare the reports, including _Wohlstetter_. Advisory panel
included _Ernest Lawrence_ and other luminaries.

_Wohlstetter_ was successful in convincing Gaither that CD was not the primary concern; that
survivability of capabilities to retaliate was.

_Sprague_ assumed duties due to _Gaither_'s illness. He was previously chief consultant of the
Killian panel (also called the Techological Capabilities Panel [TCP]) focused on surprise attack
(report delivered Feb 1955) so was predisposed to _Wohlstetter_'s findings. TCP concluded that
technological advances in intelligence gathering and warning systems were critical to ensuring US
defense, and making SAC less vulnerable. Also suggested "crash program" (p131) on ICBM and IRBM
development. Led to Polaris, U2 program. "More generally, it added scientific legitimacy to the
general feeling among many in gov't that the arms race must be continued and accelerated" (p131).

SAC under the microscope. It appears that _LeMay_ had not taken _Wohlstetter_'s findings seriously;
no significant progress had been made by SAC in 2.5 years. Gaither Committee visited SAC at NORAD
and asked to see an alert demo to see if planes could respond. In 6 hours, not one plane was able to
launch. _LeMay_ was unfazed. When pressed, LeMay disclosed that the early warning systems were not
the first alert he would get - that US intelligence had been intercepting USSR comms over the Soviet
Union for some time, and if _LeMay_ saw a bunch of bombers mobilizing, he would launch a preemptory
strike.

This was entirely against national security policy, and yet _Sprague_ decided not to tell anyone
about it.

October 1957 - Sputnik showed the US that USSR had more than intercontinental missile capability,
and if they could weaponize the missiles then US would be on its back foot. _Sprague_ and the
Gaither Committee started preparing reports in light of Sputnik and he and _James Baxter_, another
committee member, turned to _Paul Nitze_ for help in writing the policy report. _Nitze_ was openly
critical of the _Eisenhower_ administration so his involvement was discreet. _Nitze_ had previously
written NSC-141 for the previous administration, urging buildup of conventional military forces to
handle skirmishes in 3rd world and on the periphery to contain communism. Paper also focused on CD.

_Nitze_ was also co-author of NSC-68 in 1950, which highlighted USSR ambitions and Western
inadequacies. Scare memo. Outlined "Pax Americana" strategy. _Truman_'s response to NSC-68 was to
massively increase defense budget.

_Nitze_ completed another scare memo for the Gaither Committee, "Deterrence and Survival in the
Nuclear Age", again highlighting Soviet advances in technology and ideology. Highlighted
vulnerability of SAC to surprise strike. "A stark, broad-brushed portrait of the Soviet threat…."
(p142).

### Ch 9: The Report of Maximum Danger

Gaither Committee proposed $44.2 billion in spending - $19b for SAC vuln remediation; 25b for CD.

_Eisenhower_ was notoriously frugal, however, and hopes were low that these recommendations would be
implemented. _Eisenhower_ had cut post-war USAF by over 12%.

Things _Eisenhower_ hated: - Fearmongering / hype - Media leaks

_Sprague_ increasingly concerned that the Gaither Cmte report would be shelved so managed to
disclose the results of SAC readiness test (without talking about the mitigation of intelligence
collection) to _Jim Douglas_, Sec'y of USAF.

Major NSC meeting on Nov. 7, 1957 to formally present Gaither Cmte report. _Eisenhower_ in
attendance with 68 other bigwigs. At the end, _Eisenhower_ expressed concern about spending the
money. _John Foster Dulles_, Sec'y of State, was against the recommendations, favoring diplomatic
approaches.

_Sprague_ corners _Eisenhower_ after meeting and tells him about the SAC readiness test.
_Eisenhower_ doesn't respond. Turns out that _Eisenhower_ viewed the argument as fearmongering, and
he was probably aware of the intelligence collection mitigations. However, _Eisenhower_ did make
some changes to SAC availability - 1/3 of bombers in air or ready w/in 15 mins.

On Dec 9, 1957, dinner at _William Foster_'s (_Sprague_'s deputy on Gaither Committee) house. Vice
President _Nixon_ in attendance. Discussion around how to get the word out more broadly about the
danger. _Nitze_ in attendance as well.

NYT broke _Foster_ dinner news on Dec 11. On Dec 20, Washington Post article "Enormous Arms Outlay
Is Held Vital to Survival" detailing existence of Gaither report and containing lots of hype.
_Eisenhower_ furious. Democrats latch on to this to demand declassification of report. Many publicly
support the report.

### Ch 10: The Missile Gap

Origins in the "bomber gap", part of the (USAF-driven) national intelligence estimate that predicted
that the USSR would have 600-800 Bisons (long-range bombers) at their disposal. This was based on
(faulty) estimates of factory production rates, as it turns out.

CIA intel was key to exposing the flaw in the estimates: an economics intel analyst, _Ed Proctor_,
had access to all raw data and realized that the tail and markings on the bombers suggested that the
USSR was making only half what the estimates said. CIA vs USAF in intelligence analysis - USAF
interests were to keep the numbers high as it guaranteed funding.

Then, USSR ICBM demo and Sputnik came along, and the USAF pivoted to a "missile gap" - that is,
instead of claiming the US was being outpaced in bombers, now US was lagging in ICBMs. 1957 NIE
mentioned it and basically changed "bombers" to "missiles" using the same data.

CIA again disagreed with USAF estimates, this time from missile intelligence folks. Radar and other
MASINT suggested that USSR ICBM testing had slowed. USSR had only test-fired 6 ICBMs (more IRBMs).
USAF leaked that CIA was deliberately under-reporting USSR capes. _Allen Dulles_ investigated but
found no evidence of this.

Turns out that missile support systems (launchers, comms, etc) are more complex than anticipated,
and this might have been the reason why USSR was not fielding more tests. Also, US assumed 20 tests
for viability. (The USSR might not have these same standards). U2 spy photos weren't seeing anything
that would support massive USSR ICBM buildup. 1960 NIE was released late with some discrepancy
between CIA and USAF estimates (which were a bit lower than previous years), and with serious
disagreement from Army and Navy intel. However, CIA and USAF dismissed Army/Navy intelligence
estimates:

1. USN competition for $$$ vs USAF;
2. ONI head _Keith Brewer_ was a conspiracy nut who didn't believe that the Soviets had the bomb;
3. USAF had begun to implement some of _Wohlstetter_'s recommendations and with the new policy to
   keep flying/15 min ready, they had better morale and got hardware upgrades sooner. It was in USAF
   interest to keep the numbers high.

RAND kept in the dark about the modified estimates since policy change meant they were no longer
entitled to NIE reports after 1958, so they didn't know the numbers had been revised. They kept
going with the old numbers, not knowing better.

_Wolhstetter_ declassified and made parts of his R-290 report public in 1958. The publication
legitimized the discussion of USSR threat from an intellectual perspective, without having to assume
"international Communist conspiracy" theories (p172).

Dems set to take over presidency with _John Fitzgerald Kennedy_ in 1961.

### Ch 11: The Massive-Retaliation Speech

_Eisenhower_ is frugal. He sees Soviet desire to defeat the US via asymmetric military spending,
eventually bankrupting the US. He has an ally in _John Foster Dulles_, his Sec'y of State, who
believes that atomic weapons should be part of a comprehensive military strategy that doesn't
constrain the US to responding "in kind" to any aggression - that is, force-on-force in a location
of the enemy's choosing. His more flexible response option would allow first use of atomic weapons.

_Dulles_ makes this clear in a public speech in 1954 to the Council of Foreign Relations: "the way
to deter aggression is for the free community to be willing and able to respond vigorously at places
and with means of its own choosing" (p175), "reinforcing local defenses with 'the further deterrent
of massive retaliatory power'" (ibid).

_Eisenhower_ came into office not a fan of first-use policy. However, after the Korean morass failed
to produce a decisive victory and with 33k US dead, he changed his mind, calling the new policy the
"New Look". _Eisenhower_ didn't want to bleed forces and the economy in distant foreign conflicts
that sapped the strength of the US both militarily and financially.

_Dulles_' massive retaliation idea happened to be shared by USAF (recall _Curtis LeMay_'s unofficial
game plan), so once again it was US Army (_Omar Bradley_ arguing for massive buildup of conventional
troops) against USN and USAF who now have atomics in their arsenal. JCS takes the side of USAF / USN
and the idea that US response would inevitably include use of atomic weapons gains further traction.

### Ch 12: The Limited-War Critique

The _Dulles_ doctrine of allowing atomics to be used as a general response to threat (in order to
maintain flexibility of response and limit costs) had some detractors. Among them, _Paul Nitze_ and
everyone who subscribed to the Truman/Acheson doctrine espoused in NSC-68. Rationale as follows:

If the US decides to go all-out in striking the USSR in response to a local conflagration that has
escalated, the USSR will undoubtedly retaliate in kind, ensuring the destruction of both countries.
There is a moral dilemma to the use of nukes as a response to conventional / limited warfare; and
there is also the resultant self-destruction for the country that uses them. Therefore, the
deterrent capability of nukes is limited: would we really use them if the Soviets dared us to? If
not, we lose face. If so, we destroy ourselves, and in the _Von Clausewitz_ school of thought, there
is no political agenda that is worth self-destruction, so there is no justification for the use of
nukes in this case. This policy encourages the USSR to continue small-scale aggression, as they know
that we know a nuclear escalation would spell the end of the US.

These ideas were captured by _William W. Kaufmann_, a mentee of _Bernard Brodie_. _Brodie_ and
_Kaufmann_ developed and published similar ideas near-simultaneously, and had a falling out when
_Brodie_ accused _Kaufmann_ of plagiarism (which didn't happen). The US Army latched on to this
viewpoint (via _Kaufmann_'s 1955-56 essays in Military Policy and National Security) in their
funding battle vs USN / USAF, and continued to argue for an increase in conventional forces.
_Eisenhower_ maintained his opposition to conventional force buildup.

The idea is that local conflicts would be prosecuted by conventional forces under what was implied
mutual agreement by both sides, and that the conflict would end when one side determined that the
cost to continuing (or escalating) was too great to bear relative to withdrawing. Therefore, local
conflicts would essentially be fought to a stalemate - they would not result in a huge global
political change.

_Kaufmann_'s novel approach to thinking about how to conduct war was taken up by RAND.

### Ch 13: Counterforce

Counterforce: the idea that attacks against military assets/forces instead of civilians / cities,
while holding sufficient armament in reserve for followup attacks against cities, will circumscribe
the parameters of conflict to the extent that a retaliation will be in kind (that is, not against
industry/population but against military).

The dilemma was how to assure NATO that the US would respond adequately to a USSR invasion of W.
Europe. Given the probable massive retaliation against US cities from a US nuclear attack against
the USSR in response to W. Europe incursion, there would be some justified concern that the US would
not attack adequately in response, especially given the deprioritization of conventional forces.
What to do?

_William Kaufmann_ joined RAND in 1956 after publication of _Military Policy and National Security_
which he wrote at Princeton. During a war gaming exercise (_Speier_ / _Goldhamer_), the proposed
solution to NATO assurances was to give nukes to NATO allies. This disturbed _Kaufmann_ as he saw it
as needless antagonism of USSR. _Kaufmann_ meets _Wohlstetter_ at RAND right after the latter's
R-290 report (SAC vulnerability) and they discovered they were of like mind but for different
reasons (_Wohlstetter_: closer the weapons, closer to the Soviets and more vulnerable to attack).

Reenter _Bernard Brodie_, who, along with _Viktor Hunt_ (associate dir or RAND social science) and
_Andy Marshall_, joined _W. Philip Davison_ (former CPL in Army's Psych Warfare branch during WWII)
in exploring WARBO: that is, "warning and bombing" which used WWII incidents to suggest that warning
a population that a bombing was imminent was sufficient to impact productivity and supply of
matériel. This idea was expanded to suggest that a policy of NOT bombing certain areas (e.g.,
cities) might be as effective as a policy that designated areas to bomb. _Hunt_ suggested that
including both (don't bomb / bomb) types of locations in a policy would be useful, and suggested
that the "bomb" locations include counterforce, especially initial strike forces like long range
bombers. _Hunt_ circulated a memo detailing this approach.

In short: don't attack cities in the initial salvo: demonstrate capability by attacking military /
first strike capes with a fraction of arsenal, in the hopes that the enemy will see this use of
force as evidence of both restraint and resolve, and will either limit counterattack in kind
(military only) with surviving forces or come to the table before escalation.

_Hunt_'s report spawned regular meetings of strategists. Group including _Brodie_, _Charlie Hitch_
(head of econ division), and _James Digby_ (engineer) wrote a series of reports/papers that espoused
these ideas.

_Digby_ had collaborated with _Ed Barlow_ (fellow engineer) on a report that concluded that US air
defense could not stop a large-scale coordinated attack from devastating US cities, and that a
counterforce attack might reduce the attacker strength to manageable numbers.

_Digby_'s group poached by _Wohlstetter_ and ideas languished. Meanwhile, _Marshall_ and _Joseph
Loftus_ (economics) kept the ideas alive by looking at the vulnerability of airfields to nuclear
attack - could a nuke prevent bombers from getting off the ground? Answer: yes. However, USAF wasn't
keen on the idea and moved the targets from the bases closer to the cities in order to impact
civilians (as a "bonus").

_Herbert Goldhamer_ (sociologist) and _Marshall_ released a study: _The Deterrence and Strategy of
Total War, 1959-61: A Method of Analysis_ (p214), and argued convincingly (and quantitatively) for
counterforce. Showed that the Gaither report strategy (and the _Wolhstetter_-_Hoffman_ R-290 study)
showing the strategy that targeted the population produced the worst outcomes. Best outcomes were
going after military targets with very high-yield weapons that would impact some population as a
bonus, or firing some weapons at military and withholding a reserve to be used for bargaining. To
succeed, base/bunker/plane hardening, early-warning improvement, and dispersion strategies from
R-290 should be adopted.

Concern was that US didn't have enough intel about location/position of enemy combatants and
therefore counterforce targeting was doomed. However, given intel collected from WWII onward (U2 spy
planes, COMINT, etc.), _Marshall_ and _Loftus_ were reasonably confident that counterforce strategy
would work.

In 1960, General _Tommy White_ (USAF Chief of Staff) asked RAND to develop Strategic Offensive
Forces (SOF) report. SOF was supervised by _Ed Barlow_ (Director of Projects). Initially the
counterforce approach was criticized in the report, but then was rewritten to state that further
study was warranted.

_Kaufmann_ became convinced that counterforce helped achieve limited war in the era of nukes and
that killing civilians was not a "bonus" (as _Goldhamer_ and _Marshall_ suggested in their report)
but should be actively avoided in a first phase. Counteerforce thus had the advantage of assuring
NATO partners that the US had the capability, even using nukes, to defend against Soviet incursion
because it could minimize the risk of devastating retaliation.

### Ch 14: Dr. Strangelove

_Herman Kahn_ joined RAND in 1948 and started thinking about nuke strategy after reading/meeting
_Wohlstetter_ and _Brodie_. He was deliberately provocative, espousing a theoretical "doomsday
machine" that would automatically decide what level of nuclear response to produce given a specific
type of attack. He categorized nuke activity into three broad groups:

- Type 1: Deterrence - total war of the kind that LeMay at SAC espoused.
- Type 2: Not-Incredible-First-Strike - counterforce in the event conventional forces were
  unsuitable
- Type 3: Tit-for-Tat: small nuke salvos "in the event of Soviet provocations of a lesser order" (p
  224).

_Kahn _realized that having all a variety of types was a good way to ensure deterrent capabilities -
if all we had was Type 1 and we failed to use it in even a single event, then the USSR would assume
we were not serious, but if we used it, it would result in self-destruction.

Assumed Soviets had the same game theory outlook as the US, that they are reasonable and will avoid
cities and civilians to maximize post-attack blackmail. Spoke of a "deterrence gap" - threat of
Soviet nuke blackmail along the lines of what we would do.

_Kahn_ was a big supporter of massive CD projects. Proposed $200 billion(!!) solution. Didn't make
it to consideration.

Prolific public (and private) speaker. Authored _On Thermonuclear War_ (designed to update
_Clausewitz_). Took an ultra-rational approach to post-nuke survival. Others found it distasteful
but refused to hear his rebuttals.

Problem with _OTW_ was that, while it had RAND-esque mathematic rigor, it also was based on
qualitative / immeasurable assumptions that, if they didn't hold, rendered the math completely
wrong.

Suggestion that Dr. Strangelove was modeled on _Kahn_.

### Ch 15: The Real Rivalry

Rivalry (budget and prestige) between USAF and USN had historically favored AF given their
possession of atomics. USN got atomics and then found a way to deploy them on subs (Polaris).
Advantages: unlike SAC bases, subs were mostly untrackable and mobile, meaning they can get closer
to the enemy and deliver payloads quicker (straining early warning). This posed a near-existential
threat to USAF, since this new capability competed for budget.

Problem was that the missiles on Polaris were not as accurate as bombs or ICBMs, so the only
strategy that could be deployed was the total war (strategic deterrence) one in which cities were
the primary target. All of a sudden the USAF saw a discriminator in counterforce and tit-for-tat
(Type II and III strategies from Kahn) and embraced them in order to differentiate themselves from
USN and show that their approach should be funded.

_Kaufmann_ led a RAND study for USAF comparing strategies given Polaris capabilities and found that
counterforce (holding reserves to destroy cities as a bargaining chip) resulted in up to 100m fewer
casualties.

General _Tommy White_, USAF Chief, embraced the _Kaufmann_ study. SAC, however, was not happy.
_Tommy Power_, SAC commander, inherited _LeMay_'s "total war" philosophy. When challenged by
_Power_, _White_ pulled punches and conceded that the two strategies could and would coexist as
official national policy.

### Ch 16: The Whiz Kids

_Kennedy_ administration took office 1961. _Robert McNamara_ is SecDef. He assembles the Whiz Kids -
intellectuals, many from RAND, who use systems analysis to optimize military. This puts them at odds
with military leadership who view McNamara's team as ivory-tower intellectuals with no real-world
experience.

_Kennedy_ is a big proponent of counterforce strategy, and the administration cancels a bunch of
redundant bomber and missile programs, caps the minuteman production to 1000, favors hardening SAC
assets, and funds Polaris **(why?)** USAF relationship with RAND strained as they seem to lose all
the political fights in the first two years of the _Kennedy_ administration. _LeMay_, who has taken
over from _Tommy White_ as AF Chief of Staff, has multiple run-ins with the Whiz Kids.

USAF decides it needs to start doing systems analysis to get ahead of _McNamara_'s team. Murder
boards introduced.

"The Whiz Kids had transformed not only the vocabulary and procedural practices of the Pentagon, but
also the prevailing philosophy of force and strategy - not only the way weapons are chosen, but also
the way that war should be fought." (p257).

### Ch 17: Two Briefings

_McNamara_ gets briefed on WSEG-50, _Evaluation of Strategic Offensive Weapons_ and loves it - it
recommends the scrapping of B47 and B58 bombers and concludes that the B70 bomber is too slow and
costly to field in the face of new Soviet weapons.

_Hitch_ and _Enthoven_ from RAND are disturbed because the report also concludes that counterforce
strategy is a waste of time - even if we were able to neutralize a good part of Soviet forces, their
remaining arsenal could result in significant deaths. Instead, WSEG-50 recommended _Brodie_'s
initial strategy of finite deterrence (diminishing returns), which stated that past a given point,
the cost of one more weapon does not create an equal benefit given the destructive capability
already available. _McNamara_ is a rational economist so the idea that we could have an upper limit
on weapons production is appealing.

RAND persuades _McNamara_ to have another briefing, this time on advantages of counterforce. Two
problems emerge: 1) how to end the war, and 2) how to stop military from having an open-ended
request for more missiles because counterforce requires parity with opposition. In effect, for every
Soviet missile, the US would need > 1 missile to counteract.

Despite weaknesses, _McNamara_ saw sense in counterforce, especially after visiting SAC and coming
away in horror at the naïveté and lack of planning contained in their SIOP.

### Ch 18: The SIOP and the Road to Ann Arbor

SIOP (Single Integrated Operational Plan) was developed by USAF as an attempt to control the
management of US nukes (at the expense of the US Navy). The rationale was that if each command were
responsible for managing their own target list, there would be duplication and waste. SAC's first
goal was to manage the entire thing; failing that, it would lead a joint group to do so. That's what
happened.

USN objected strenuously. SAC wound up adding many targets to their list (recall they favored this
"unlimited" war) and relegated Polaris to attacks against air defenses and hardened targets that
would show failure (because Polaris was not as accurate as minuteman / bombers).

SIOP also included Chinese and Eastern Bloc cities in its scope, when they housed Soviet assets. The
trigger was "General War against the USSR" which was defined as any overt conflict, no matter how
large or where. _McNamara_ objected strenuously to this plan (Albania would be obliterated because
they hosted Soviet radar, even though the country was trying to distance themselves from USSR
influence).

Given that _Kauffman_'s "no cities" briefing was the following week, it got a very warm reception.
_Charlie Hitch_, _Alain Enthoven_ and _Marvin Stern_ gave _McNamara_ the report he had asked for at
the very beginning of his tenure as SecDef on strategic nuclear war policy. Report recommended
hardening minuteman, building mobile Polaris missiles, phasing out bombers, hardening or placing on
alert more active bombers, and adopting a war plan that focused on destroying enemy forces instead
of cities as a first attack, holding destruction of cities as a bargaining chip.

This report represented the combination of 3 RAND philosophies:

1. mitigation of SAC vulnerability through hardening/dispersal (_Wohlstetter_)
2. formalization of systems analysis (_Paxton_ and _Hitch_)
3. "counterforce/no cities" strategy (_Brodie_, _Kauffman_)

_McNamara_ asked military branches to respond to 96 (pared down to 92) RFIs due on quick turn. The
first two were:

1. "Prepare a draft memorandum revising the basic national security policies and assumptions,
   including the assumptionbs relating to counterforce strikes" (p273)
2. "Prepare a 'doctrine' which, if accepted, would permit controlled response and negotiating payses
   in the event of thermonuclear attack" (p273)

First was given to CJCS and the Office of the Assistant Sec'y of Defense for International Security
Affairs (_Nitze_). Second was given to CJCS General _Lyman Lemnitzer_.

_Lemnitzer_ replied a day late and a dollar short: he disagreed with the idea of a "controlled
response" and wrote that "we do not now have adequate defenses, nor are our nuclear retaliatory
forces sufficiently invulnerable, to permit us to risk withholding a substantial part of our
effort...." (p273). _Lemnitzer_'s goal was to frustrate McNamara's idea of "controlled response".
Military thinking was always "hit hard and fast with everything you've got", and this was no
different. _Lemnitzer_'s other objection was also a concern to _McNamara_: the controlled response
required the Soviets to respond in kind. Would they play along with increasing escalation and
pauses?

_Nitze_ turned his assignment over to _Harry Rowen_ who gave it to _Daniel Ellsberg_ (RAND), only 29
years old. _Ellsberg_ had had unprecedented access to JCS war plans and was not happy with what he
saw: there were discrepancies and a single plan that did not take into account natural contingencies
(weather, delayed communications, etc.) The plan would result in an all-out launch of nukes against
countries uninvolved in the US/USSR conflict.

SAC insisted on a single war plan with minor options, but it failed to account for weaknesses in
comms and wind speed, for example.

_JCSP_ (Joint Strategic Capabilities Plan) and _JCOP_ (Operations Plan) were meant to be in sync,
but the JCSP defined "General War" as "any conflict between USSR and US" without qualification. This
threatened to turn any hot war into a total nuke war.

_Ellsberg_ finished his project for _McNamara_ 10 days early. A defining thought: "the United States
does not hold all the people of Russia, China, or the \[East European\] Satellite nations
responsible for the acts of their governments. Consequently, it is not an objective of the United
States to maximize the number of people killed in the Communist Bloc in the event of war." (p278).
Furthermore, it opined that attacks against command and control systems, or high-level government
facilities/personnel, would have the potential effect of escalating the war as comms broke down and
lower-level leaders would have no central direction to pause or control their response. Report
favored "counterforce/no cities".

_Enthoven_ and _Trinkl_ took _Ellsberg_'s revised SIOP recommendations and broke down Soviet targets
into 5 escalatory categories:

1. strategic forces (air bases, missile sites, sub pens)
2. air-defense sites away from cities
3. air-defense sites closer to cities
4. C2 centers
5. all-out strike against cities

The idea would be a proportional/escalatory response to Soviet aggression.

Also included were "country withholds" - guidance to avoid hitting any targets (e.g., China, Eastern
Europe). This provided "control, flexibility, \[and\] discrimination options" (p279.)

McNamara favored this approach. This required USAF to change the minuteman program to provide for a
limited launch (instead of the minimum 50 missiles at a time) and dynamic retargeting. USAF dragged
its feet, so _Marvin Stern_ withheld funding for minuteman for a month. USAF finally got the message
and made the changes ($840m).

McNamara's position to Kennedy: "The forces I am recommending have been chosen to provide the United
States with the capability, in the event of a Soviet nuclear attack, first to strike back against
Soviet bomber bases, missile sites, and other installations associated with long-range nuclear
forces, in order to reduce Soviet power and limit the damage that can be done to us by vulnerable
Soviet follow-on forces, while, second, holding in protect reserve forces capable of destroying the
Soviet urban society... in a controlled and deliberate way." (pp281-2)

McNamara made the strategy public to NATO. Recall that RAND had felt that nukes controlled by NATO
allies would destablilize the situation. France and UK wanted their own nukes and planned to hit
cities with them in the event of aggression, since they felt that the US would not risk one of its
own cities in retaliation for a USSR incursion into Western Europe. US said that if NATO forces
targeted cities, it would leave the alliance. Independent nuclear forces inside NATO would
complicate the delicate strategic balance and communication of proportional
response/counter-response needed by both US and USSR to avoid turning things into a full-scale war.

### Ch 19: The Gap That Never Was

Turns out the Soviets didn't have as many missiles as either the CIA or SAC (or Kennedy) thought.
Based on satellite photos, the revised estimates went from ~200 SS6 ICBMs to just 4. The missile gap
was in our favor. This caused a revisit of _Kaufmann_'s counterforce/no-cities strategy, since it
was no longer necessary to stockpile so many weapons as counterforce would be trivial.

### Ch 20: The Crises

Two crises in the early days of the _Kennedy_ administration put to the test whether the US would
seriously consider the first use of nuclear weapons in response to conventional Soviet aggression.
The first, during the time surrounding the establishment of the Berlin Wall, saw the US and the
relatively new NATO on its back feet. _Khrushchev_ had threatened to sign a peace treaty with East
Germany and give them complete authority over Berlin. He was operating under the mistaken assumption
that the US had overestimated USSR atomic capabilities and he was bluffing strength when he had the
added advantage of proximity. Debate within the US as to how to handle a hot war and escalation: at
this point the "give 'em everything'" SIOP was in place, so _McNamara_ asked for more flexible
options. This involved drawing up plans for additional conventional forces, restarting B47 bomber
program, and a speedup of CD programs.

The forces were there primarily "to give the Russians time for second thoughts, to allow for what
many called a 'negotiation pause,' before the conflict escalated to nuclar war." (p298).

Wall constructed starting 13AUG. _McNamara_ commissioned a study on flexible response options
(_Rowan_ / _Kaysen_ report), which was delivered just after the US realized that the USSR only had 4
ICBMs. Study concluded that a small counterforce strike would be extremely successful, since the air
defenses had gaps and the early-warning systems were not tuned for small sorties.

However: when push came to shove, everyone was against the idea of a first-strike attack. Even
(especially) _Nitze_, who had had a change of heart and had even advocated for the transfer of nukes
to the UN. (He changed his mind again.) _Nitze_ was concerned about USSR retaliation using surviving
nukes as well as the IRBMs that could hit Western Europe. Turns out NATO didn't want to think about
it either; during a war game exercise, phase 4, which was intended to strategize the use of nukes,
devolved into "Call Washington" (p303).

_Khrushchev_ lost a bit of face, having bluffed and been called.

Second crisis: Cuban Missile Crisis. _Khrushchev_ started deployment of IRBMs capable of hitting US
in Cuba in the latter half of 1962 in an attempt to regain some prestige. US mobilized conventional
forces in GA and FL with an idea of invading Cuba. Geography was not on USSR's side, and they had to
back down. However, during planning sessions when the use of first-strike nukes came up, nobody
wanted to consider it.

_Kennedy_'s announced policy: "It shall be the policy of this nation to regard any nuclear missile
launched from Cuba against any nation in the Western hemisphere as an attack by the Soviet Union on
the United States requiring a full retaliatory response...." - note that a nuclear response was not
specifically threatened.

Post-Cuba, "American superiority was obvious." (p305). USSR realized this and started a massive push
to bolster nuclear stockpile - 1400 ICBMs and a fleet of nuke subs in a decade, along with hardening
their bases. Even when we had the upper hand and knew it, we couldn't bring ourselves to seriously
consider using first-strike nukes.

### Ch 21: Shelter Mania

Berlin crisis had an impact on previous thoughts about civil defense and survivability of war. At
the end of _Eisenhower_'s term, the Office of Civil Defense Mobilization proposed a huge CD program
that provided shelter spaces for the majority of Americans. When _Kennedy_ took office, he asked
_McGeorge Bundy_ (natsec advisor) to take a look.

_Bundy_ gave the task to _Cark Kaysen_ and _Marc Raskin_. _Kaysen_ was initially pro-shelter;
_Raskin_ was not. _Kaysen_ became more skeptical as he dug deeper.

_Kennedy_ was feeling political pressure to do something re: protecting Americans via CD efforts
because _John D. Rockefeller_ was a fervent supporter (he was the one who persuaded _Eisenhower_ to
start the Gaither commission) and was a potential political opponent in the 1964 race.

_Kennedy_'s disastrous meeting in Vienna with _Khrushchev_ led him to conclude that he had to do
something. He increased CD budget by 500% over previous year. As Berlin heated up, _Kennedy_ became
a bigger proponent of CD. He introduced an article in Life Magazine about fallout shelters and
commissioned a pamphlet to be distributed to every household.

Pamphlet was a disaster - it painted the effects of nuclear war as trivial, especially if you were
wealthy. _Kennedy_'s team revised it and scaled back its distribution. Shelter mania was gripping
the US at this point.

Enter _Edward Teller_, himself a proponent of shelters. He met with _Jerry Wiesner_ (science
advisor)to discuss his recommendation - that as weapons got bigger, all we had to do was dig
deeper - and _Wiesner_ (who had transformed from hawk to favoring disarmament) saw that this would
go over like a lead balloon with _Kennedy_ and would stop all this nonsense. He persuaded _Teller_
to brief _Kennedy_ and sure enough, that was the end of fallout shelter support. Congress stripped
most of the CD budget and _Kennedy_ didn't raise a stink.

Bottom line: "_Herman Kahn_'s vision of the urban population casually evacuating two of three times
a decade to bolster national resolve... took a terrible and sobering beating. And so, with it, did
another piece of the concept of a controllable nuclear war." (p314).

### Ch 22: Damage Unlimited

_McNamara_ started off as a fan of counterforce/no-cities and gave a speech in Ann Arbor that stated
that this was the official US policy. USAF used this as an opportunity to "brag" to _McNamara_ that
they were in agreement and that they were prepared to develop a first-strike capability to help
deter the Soviets. But this isn't really what _McNamara_ had in mind. He was having a bit of a
change of heart, since he was realizing that counterforce/no-cities just led to an unlimited arms
race. His new preference was a "damage-limiting" strategy which did not rely on an effective first
strike but nevertheless maintained survivability for a counterattack (against cities AND forces).
USAF and JCS kept pressing for more weapons, and this caused _McNamara_ to instruct DOD that
counterforce as a justification for increased budgets was no longer acceptable.

If not counterforce, then what? The WSEG-50 proposed "finite deterrence" which included city
destruction. It didn't get a whole lot of love from _Enthoven_ and _Hitch_ - who, recall, read it
and then had _Kauffman_ brief _McNamara_ in order to try to change (and successfully changing) his
mind in 1960. However, in 1963, _McNamara_ adopted a new strategy called "Assured Destruction".

Assured destruction was a deterrence-focused strategy. After a surprise USSR counterforce strike,
the US should have enough survivability to destroy "government and military controls as well as a
large percentage of [its] population an industral base." (p317). Idea was that if we could kill 30%
of their population and 50% industrial capacity, USSR would be deterred. The whiz kids calculated
that would take 400 megatons, but this was "funny science". Basically, the marginal returns past 400
megatons decreased to the point where the cost of an additional weapon would not be worth the
marginal destruction it caused. Also, _Enthoven_ had calculated that we would have at least 1200
megatons by 1969, and 400 megatons for each of the three legs of the triad would provide
survivability.

The actual targeting plan remained "Damage Limiting", which was another word for "counterforce".
Only 18% of the stockpile would be targeted on cities, the rest on military.

Problems with counterforce increased as the Soviets took a page from our playbook and started
hardening their targets and developing SLBMs. SLBMs make counterforce almost impossible because the
subs are difficult to find and destroy. Enter USAF General _Glenn Kent_, who analyzed defensive
capabilities of ABMs, counterforce, and civil defense in terms of cost effectiveness. He found that
this "damage limiting" strategy was pretty much useless: it would cost $3.20 in (US) defense against
ever $1 in (Soviet) offense. Nukes provided an asymmetric financial burden on the defender. CD
shelters at $5.8 billion provided the best return on investment.

JCS wanted more money for weapons and was no fan of Assured Destruction. _McNamara_ slyly decided to
order the Pentagon to study what mix of ABM, counterforce, and CD would be the best, and he had
_Kent_ head it up. The report was issued and the DOD were pleased at the beginning, since it
revealed that damage-limiting was feasible and required further investment across all three
branches. _McNamara_ pointed out that the study revealed that "if the Soviets reacted to [our
strategy] by increasing their own offensive forces, the effects of damage-limiting would quickly
reach the point of diminishing marginal returns and, in fact, ... the Soviets could add to their
offense far more cheaply than the US could continue adding to its defense." (p325). Checkmate, DOD.
(They were ticked!)

_McNamara_ continued to back off from counterforce and damage-limiting through 1964, though he
compromised a bit: he limited Minutemen to 1000 ICBMs, but funded a new guidance system that made
them more accurate (and therefore effective against hardened targets), and started research on
MIRVs. The Whiz Kids, even those who were initial authors/proponents of counterforce, started
changing their minds.

### Ch 23: Vietnam: Stalemate

Vietnam strategy was to apply counterforce/no-cities ("limited war") doctrine to conventional war:
use strategic bombing as a means to impose a "shot across the bow" that implied more serious
consequences in the event the enemy didn't change its approach. _McNamara_ took as inspiration the
briefing that _Kaufmann_ gave in 1961 on limited war (sending messages, precise destruction, drive
to stalemate instead of escalation). _Thomas Schelling_, a former colleague of _Kaufmann_, applied
bargaining strategy to war. He realized that flexibility in bargaining can be a disadvantage as it
tells the opponent that you have options that you are not yet willing to use. _Schelling_, in his
book _The Strategy of Conflict_ (1960), argued that war was "a particularly violent form of
bargaining" (p330) in which there is a possibility of a "non-zero-sum" outcome. ("In a traffic jam,
you want to pass a car, but you don't want to smash it; in limited war, you want to defeat the
enemy's will without compelling him to bring nuclear weapons into play" (p331), in his book _The
Strategy of Conflict_ (1960), argued that war was "a particularly violent form of bargaining" (p330)
in which there is a possibility of a "non-zero-sum" outcome. ("In a traffic jam, you want to pass a
car, but you don't want to smash it; in limited war, you want to defeat the enemy's will without
compelling him to bring nuclear weapons into play" (p331)).

Schelling also studied nuclear arms control. Developed this theory called "Reciprocal Fear of
Surprise Attack" - if both sides were in an arms race, then first attack risk increases since
counterforce vulnerability oscillates. Therefore, arms control treaties that limit the deployment of
weapons that were 1) vulnerable to attack and 2) useful in a first strke could reduce the advantage
of a first strike, thereby reducing the incentive of parties to strike first. "...\[W\]eapons of
great counterforce power upset the 'stability' of the balance of terror and heighten the
incentives... to launch a preemptive first strike." (p331).

If counterforce was inherently destabilizing, how would US use the threat of nukes to deter Soviet
aggression? _Schelling_ concluded that putting pressure on USSR "through limited or graduated
reprisals" (p332) and sending signals about escalatory capability (similar to _Kahn_'s tit-for-tat
Type III Deterrence strategy) could still offer a deterrent effect: "demonstrat\[e\] resolve,
appeal\[\] to the opponent's rational calculations to back off..." (p332).

In _Arms and Influence_, _Schelling_ argued that we should exploit the "bargaining power that comes
from \[the\] capacity to hurt" and that it was in limited wars that bargaining power is most
effective (SAB: perhaps because the level of escalation relative to the ceiling is low?).

_John McNaughton_, a friend of _Schelling_, was tapped to be _Nitze_'s (at the time, _Nitze_ was new
Asst Secy of Defense for Int'l Security Affairs under _McNamara_) arms-control deputy - when _Nitze_
was promoted to Sec'y of Navy, _McNaughton_ took over his old post.

Initial strategy in Vietnam was to use "limited war" doctrine - find opportunities to show the North
Vietnamese that an action that they took was not desired by strategic and increasingly destructive
actions, using the threat of "greater pain and pressure" (p334). Problem is, when faced with the
question as to what we might want the North Vietnamese to do or stop doing that they would obey,
_Schelling_ and _McNaughton_ couldn't find a good answer. It seemed as if the doctrine of "limited
war" was inapplicable to Vietnam.

Problem was, the North Vietnamese (and possibly Russia and China) were either oblivious to, or
indifferent to, the "signals" the US was trying to send. They kept attacking, including damaging
airbase at Bien Hoa and killing US troops there.

Results: _McNamara_ became disillusioned with military strategy (vice economic stability) as a proxy
for national security, eventually leaving the US government to head up the World Bank. _Daniel
Ellsberg_, a former Cold Warrior, leaked the Pentagon Papers to the Washington Post. _Brodie_ "came
to realize that the Soviets were not irrational monsters" (p338) and started sympathizing with
French strategists who favored a decentralized military force/arsenal controlled by NATO member
countries so that the Soviets wouldn't have a single target. They also felt that _McNamara_'s policy
against first-strike nukes blunted their usefulness as a deterrent, and that the Russians would not
hesitate to use nukes once committed to a war against Western Europe. _Brodie_'s falling out with
_Wohlstetter_ (poli sci vs math) sped this conversion along. _Brodie_ was not part of the Whiz Kids
and was not asked to play a role in any strategy. Over time, _Brodie_ rejected the RAND philosophy
that evolved from his original ideas and returned to his roots / first principles: "Thus far the
chief purpose of our military establishment has been to win wars. From now on... \[it\] must be to
avert them. It can have almost no other useful purpose."

Having options may not always be good: it allowed the US to intervene in Vietnam without calling up
reserves (due to having a large enough conventional force) and escalate. But choice is an illusion
if the ultimate response is use of nukes.

### Ch 24: The ABM Debate

ABM - shooting down a missile with another missile - had been an idea since the mid 1940s. Army and
Pentagon R&D started working on Nike-Zeus. First serious discussions began in 1958 with the Reentry
Body Identification Group (RBIG), which concluded that N-Z would not work: radars were vulnerable to
destruction, EMP, and blackouts caused by ionization of the atmosphere; decoys would cause the
missiles to target the wrong things, and the explosion of N-Z might cause the EMP / blackouts
itself. Also possible to overwhelm N-Z sites - it might get some, but others would get through (MRVs
especially). Cost to deploy this countermeasure could exceed the cost to circumvent it.

_Eisenhower_'s Presidential Science Advisory Committee (PSAC) came to the same conclusions re: the
effectiveness of N-Z. As a result, Pentagon kept N-Z in R&D status.

When _Kennedy_ came to power in 1961, Army tried again to get N-Z off the ground. _McNamara_
initially favored the program (but scaled down from 7k missiles/70 sites to 1200 missiles/12 sites).
_Jerome Wiesner_, Charmain of the 1959 PSAC, was now _Kennedy_'s science advisor and began to speak
to him against the N-Z. By November 1961, _Kennedy_ was against the ABM program. Army was still
interested, though, and had come up with a new ABM system that incorporated new radar and two
missiles: long-range (Spartan), and short-range (Sprint) that could manage decoys. Package renamed
Nike-X. Basic issues persisted. _McNamara_ having second thoughts about ABMs as well, but there were
political pressures. He couldn't kill Nike-X, so funded them for R&D instead of production.

Congress put enough money in the budget for ABM production for the Army to field a system in 1966.
_Johnson_, now president, had secdef vs political establishment/military. _McNamara_ offered a
compromise: continue R&D but wait to see whether we can get an arms-control agreement with the USSR.
_Johnson_ accepted.

_McNamara_ continued his campaign to _Johnson_ about futility of ABM systems but during a meeting
with the Soviets in June 1967, the Soviet response was that it wasn't defensive systems causing the
angst, it was the offensive ones. _Johnson_ ordered _McNamara_ to fund Nike-X. _McNamara_, in order
to perhaps save face and sow confusion, wrote a speech explaining the decision to fund Sentinel
(effectively the old Nike-X) by raising the spectre of a Red China threat.

_Wohlstetter_, fired from RAND in early 1960s, found his way to SRI which was helping the Army come
up with a justification for ABMs. He was also worried about China and saw ABMs as a way to
discourage smaller nations from developing nukes, which satisfied his anti-global-proliferation
belief.

By 1968, failure of Vietnam causing political establishment to question military doctrine in
general. Popular protest against ABMs coupled with publication of the vulnerabilities led senators
to enlist scientists to speak out against the ABM in Congress.

Enter _Richard Nixon_ who tells _Henry Kissinger_ (SecDef) to tell the Pentagon that

1. There will be ABMs,
2. They will be cheaper than Democrats' ABMs,
3. They will be effective against USSR as well as China.

_Nixon_ kills Sentinel and starts up Safeguard, which is designed to protect Minuteman silos, not
cities. Safeguard is essentially Sentinel, repurposed, with all attendant issues. Critics argue that
Minuteman not as vulnerable as expected, plus it was only one leg of the triad and so therefore not
by itself critical. Finally, effectiveness issues remain.

Big threat: Soviet SS-9s with a 25-megaton warhead. Refitted with 3 smaller warheads. MRVs or MIRVs?
NIE thought the former, but _Kissinger_ persuaded the CIA to change it to the latter. Since CIA had
estimated 400 SS-9s, if the 3 warheads were MIRVs, then the 1000 Minuteman missiles were at risk and
therefore Safeguard was needed.

_George Rathgens_ vs _Albert Wohlstetter_ before Congress. _Rathgens_ arguing against ABMs using
old/faulty data. _Wolhstetter_ persuaded the Operations Research Society of America (ORSA) to
investigate an OR approach to resolving the ABM debate. _Rathgens_ and co not even members, so they
object. Final report 100% in favor of _Wohlstetter_.

However: turns out the Soviets weren't building an ABM system themelves, the SS-9 wasn't a MIRV
missile, and it wasn't as accurate as thought. They got MIRVs in 1974, but in 1972 the two parties
signed SALT-1 and ABM Treaty limiting deployment of ABMs.

Debate "marked the first time that experts outside the Pentagon were extensively consulted on
defense issues...." (p354).

Turns out that if you take data from weapons designers and estimate capabilities, but fail to
reconcile the initial numbers with real-world assessments, you can be off by 3x-10x. Problem was
that the new cadre of military and scientists were taking the design numbers as gospel and not
adding corrections. The realm of nuclear strategy thus "\[be\]came disconnected not only from what
Bernard Brodie would call 'the political dimension' but also from the technical realities of the
very weapons that circumscribed what strategy can do." (p355).

### Ch 25: The New Generation

(LONG CHAPTER)

New Guard of analysts using calculations based on design started gaining positions of power
throughout the military and started impacting strategy. Old RAND theories were resurrected:
counterforce, limited war, tit-for-tat, coercive. USAF spearheading with leadership familiar with
_Wohlstetter_, _Kahn_, _Kaufmann_, _Brodie_, _Schelling_, and other RANDians. Cadre banded together
to create NU-OPTS group (Nuclear Options). General _Richard Ellis_ and Generals _Russell Dougherty_
and _Leslie Bray_ founded, along with General _Richard Yudkin_.

_Yudkin_ introduced at RAND to _James Schlesinger_, an economist and friend of _Andy Marshall_.
_Schlesinger_ having doubts about counterforce: the USSR nuke program was developed enough that it
would hard to distinguish a counterforce strike from an all-out assault. Was there an alternative?

_Schlesinger_ adopted the view of _Thomas Schelling_, who advocated for "graduated reprisals": that
is, small-scale strikes, gradually escalating but giving time and space for the enemy to reconsider
COA.

NU-OPTS published a memorandum advocating this strategy. USAF liked it because it gave an argument
for a new bomber and more funding. However, the strategy wasn't an operational plan: it did not
specify the types of targets to hit, nor in what quantity. So USAF and RAND started studying this.
The project failed due to these and other uncertainties. For example, if bombers were going to be
used, we would need surprise. However, NU-OPTS depended on telling the Soviets in advance what we
were about to do, so this would require fighter escorts, which in sufficient numbers would be
indistinguishable from an all-out attack. Furthermore, it depended on the Soviets recognizing this
as an attempt to coerce behavior and responding accordingly. If they didn't back down, what then?
The questions still remained: how does a nuclear war end?

Detractors saw parallels in Vietnam where the North Vietnamese had not been coerced and had ignored
our signals.

Development of MIRVs reinvigorated NU-OPTS. It would be possible to dramatically increase the number
of warheads while keeping the number of missiles relatively low. _McNamara_ liked the idea since it
allowed him to get the USAF to agree to an upper limit of 1000 Minutemen and it also helped
reinforce the flaws in the pro-ABM argument. Even though the official doctrine was "assured
destruction", MIRVs allowed counterforce strategy to live on.

In order to be really successful, NU-OPTS had to change the SIOP (nuclear targeting plan). Problem
was that the expansion of the Soviet force since 1961 (SIOP-63) meant that targeting would have to
be expanded, which looks like an all-out attack instead of a limited one. The smallest strike option
was 2,000 weapons. Other SIOP problem was that the military targets were close to cities, so there
would be a lot of civilian deaths from fallout. Assured destruction was still the order of the day
as a result.

_Richard Nixon_ assumes presidency in 1969, appoints _Henry Kissinger_ as National Security Adviser.
_Kissinger_ hates massive retaliation strategy and has _Nixon_ issue NSSM-3, an order to study
military posture. NSSM-3 killed assured destruction: "\[A\]n American capacity for early 'war
termination, avoiding attacks on cities, and selective response capabilities might provide ways of
limiting damage if deterrence fails." (p366).

_Wohlstetter_ advises the Strategic Objectives Study, which is tasked with examining expanding
nuclear options available to the US. No-cities makes a comeback, of course.

Problem was that the Whiz Kids had burned any relationship with DOD/Pentagon so the military was
disinclined towards any recommendation by the White House. Defense Sec'y _Melvin Laird_ set up a
high-level DOD panel to do the same sort of analysis and recruited _Jonny Foster_ (Livermore) to
lead it. _Foster_ was a proponent of counterforce and new weapons development. _Foster_ recruited
_Seymour Weiss_ from State Dept to help. _Weiss_ was friendly with _Nitze_, _Enthoven_, _Kaufmann_,
etc. and heard from them about counterforce and the benefit of options. Foster panel born and
eventually recommends counterforce/no-cities and NU-OPTS mix.

_Kissinger_ turns the Foster Panel into an interagency group headed by _Philip Odeen_ on NSC staff.
_Odeen_'s group authors the NUWEP (Nuclear Weapons Employment Plan) providing targeting guidance in
response to _Kissinger_'s order NSM-169 and shorter memo. The memo becomes NSDM-242 ("Planning the
Employment of Nuclear Weapons") and was essentially the Foster Group's conclusions.

Problem with this is that it was hard to turn theory into practice. During a discussion regarding
responses to a hypothetical Russian invasion of Iran, JCS proposed firing 200 nukes at military
targets in the southern USSR as a limited response. _Kissinger_ tells them to come back with another
idea. JCS returns with a 2-nuke response (severing roads from Russia to Iran). Kissinger hates this
idea as well as he thinks it makes us look weak. What are viable options?

_Schlesinger_ now SecDef (1973). Knows about the Foster Report and is supportive (since the original
ideas came from NU-OPTS). Decides to turn it into policy, and envisions a new sub-launched Trident
II missile with more accuracy, thereby extending counterforce across all three legs of the triad.

_Schlesinger_ hires _Kaufmann_ as consultant (and speechwriter). NSC dragging its feet on NSDM-242
so _Schlesinger_ decides to go public with the ideas in January 1974, announcing a "change in
targeting strategy" (p373). _Kissinger_ angry at publicity but NSDM-242 was signed by _Nixon_ the
next week.

_Kaufmann_ was blind-sided as well. He didn't like the "small-strike" escalatory approach (he was
pure counterforce). He advocates even more flexibility but helps _Schlesinger_ justify his approach
because the Soviets were fielding MIRVs themselves.

Problems with accuracy (not precision) plagued missiles due to uneven gravity. Large-scale
counterforce attacks (of which _Schlesinger_ was not fond) would have exploding warheads interfering
with each other ("fratricide"). _Schlesinger_ felt that a large counterforce volley would be too
much for an opponent to decide to come to the negotiating table.

NSDM-242 effect was like _McNamara_'s Ann Arbor speech: gave DOD standing to request more funding
for weapons (bombers and missiles) and a new ICBM called the MX. _Schlesinger_ believed that public
perception of military might was important and was not against funding these systems even though he
had said there would be no add'l weapons requirements.

_Nitze_ still around and thought SALT II was not dealing with USSR MIRV threat. Wrote article in Jan
1976 _Foreign Affairs_ stating that SALT II would not hamper the USSR since they had MIRVs with
sufficient destructive capacity AND a robust CD program. Shoe is on the other foot: nuclear
blackmail by USSR against the US is now feasible.

_Nitze_'s article contained graphs and math representing theoretical calculations of tonnage, CEP,
throw-weight, etc. and showed USSR in the lead. But what would the US response to a Soviet
counterforce first-strike be? "What happens next? How does the war end? How do you fight a nuclear
war?" (p379).

_Nitze_ sets up an organization called Committee on the Present Danger (CPD). _Gerald Ford_, now
President, worries that _Schesinger_ is out to torpedo SALT, fires him, and replaces him with
_Donald Rumsfeld_.

_Jimmy Carter_ enters the 1976 Democratic primary and _Nitze_ supports campaign only to be sidelined
once _Carter_ wins. Turns out _Carter_ is a dove. CPD is now against _Carter_ policies and takes him
to task. When _Carter_ signed SALT II in 1979 (never ratified by Congress), _Nitze_ incensed
because, although relatively modest, it left the Soviets with superior megatonnage and throw weight
numbers. _Nitze_'s arguments get widespread publicity and popularity, and strong counterforce
capability "emerged as the conventional wisdom." (p382).

Turns out _Carter_ was originally a "no-nukes" guy, but changed his stance (perhaps to get support
for SALT II). But Soviet advances/provocations (Afghanistan 1979) and _Zbigniew Brzezinski_, his
National Security Advisor, helped him change his tune. But most significant was the groundswell of
support for NSDM-242 / Foster Panel. _Carter_ realized that options were better than no options and
signed PD-18, which reaffirmed NSDM-242 and NUWEP as official policy. _Carter_ ordered a new
targeting study in 1978, which resulted in PD-59. PD-59 "ordered options that were still more
limited, a withheld reserve force that was slightly larger, a greater emphasis on using nuclear
weapons to destroy conventional military targets... as well as... nuclear targets, ... and it
planned more explicitly for the possibility of fighting a nuclear war over an extended period of
time... a task requiring vast and highly expensive improvements in the nation's
command-control-communications network...." (p383).

Hardening C2 systems was thought impossible but the Pentagon got tens of billions of dollars to
figure it out.

"Fundamentally, there was nothing new about PD-59. It was merely an elaboration of NSDM-242, which
grew out of the Foster Panel, which was explicitly based on _McNamara_'s SIOP-63 guidance of
1961-62, which was modeled on a decade of analysis at RAND." (p384).

### Ch 26: Dancing in the Dark

RAND philosophy enshrined as US policy by the time _Reagan_ takes office. Counterforce endorsed.
_Carter_ had approved 200 MX missiles, rotated among 4300(!) silos. Some skepticism within
_Carter_'s staff but no real resistance.

_Reagan_ was a member of _Nitze_'s CPD, and _Nitze_ finally has a gov't position. _Casper
Weinberger_, Sec'y of Defense, signed memo calling for US to have sufficient forces to win against
USSR and force them to the negotiating table on terms favorable to US. Epitomized "coercive
strategy" - hurt enemy and make him do something under threat of being hurt more. RAND influence
abounds because of tight connections between _Reagan_ staff and RANDians.

However: nobody still had any good idea how to actually fight a nuclear war. The folks in charge
were now folks who had not seen large-scale conflict and the math and calculations re: nukes were
still theoretical. Moreover, because strategies like counterforce had been around for so long, they
were taken as doctrine and bandied about as if they were no big deal. Sec'y of State _Alexander
Haig_ "said that he could imagine the US firing off a single nuclear weapon for 'demonstration'
purposes during a war in Europe...." (p388). Fighting using nukes now more banal than ever. "\[t\]he
ideas had been around and had been officially... accepted for so long, that it was easy to forget
that there was nothing more in the real world to substantiate them in 1982 than there had been in
1952, when the ideas first took form." (p389). Thus we end as we began: "The nuclear strategists had
come to impose order - but in the end, chaos still prevailed." (p391).
